02 INFORMATION ABOUT PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS/PROJECT DIRECTORS(PI/PD) and
co-PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS/co-PROJECT DIRECTORS
Submit only ONE copy of this form for each PI/PD and co-PI/PD identified on the proposal. The form(s) should be attached to the original
proposal as specified in GPG Section II.C.a. Submission of this information is voluntary and is not a precondition of award. This information will
not be disclosed to external peer reviewers. DO NOT INCLUDE THIS FORM WITH ANY OF THE OTHER COPIES OF YOUR PROPOSAL AS
THIS MAY COMPROMISE THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE INFORMATION.
PI/PD Name:

Monte J Shaffer

Gender:

Male

Female

Ethnicity: (Choose one response)

Hispanic or Latino

Race:
(Select one or more)

American Indian or Alaska Native

Not Hispanic or Latino

Asian
Black or African American
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
White

Disability Status:
(Select one or more)

Hearing Impairment
Visual Impairment
Mobility/Orthopedic Impairment
Other
None

Citizenship:

(Choose one)

U.S. Citizen

Permanent Resident

Other non-U.S. Citizen

Check here if you do not wish to provide any or all of the above information (excluding PI/PD name):
REQUIRED: Check here if you are currently serving (or have previously served) as a PI, co-PI or PD on any federally funded
project
Ethnicity Definition:
Hispanic or Latino. A person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless
of race.
Race Definitions:
American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central
America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.
Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for
example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa.
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa,
or other Pacific Islands.
White. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa.
WHY THIS INFORMATION IS BEING REQUESTED:
The Federal Government has a continuing commitment to monitor the operation of its review and award processes to identify and address
any inequities based on gender, race, ethnicity, or disability of its proposed PIs/PDs. To gather information needed for this important
task, the proposer should submit a single copy of this form for each identified PI/PD with each proposal. Submission of the requested
information is voluntary and will not affect the organization’s eligibility for an award. However, information not submitted will seriously undermine
the statistical validity, and therefore the usefulness, of information recieved from others. Any individual not wishing to submit some or all the
information should check the box provided for this purpose. (The exceptions are the PI/PD name and the information about prior Federal support, the
last question above.)
Collection of this information is authorized by the NSF Act of 1950, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1861, et seq. Demographic data allows NSF to
gauge whether our programs and other opportunities in science and technology are fairly reaching and benefiting everyone regardless of
demographic category; to ensure that those in under-represented groups have the same knowledge of and access to programs and other
research and educational oppurtunities; and to assess involvement of international investigators in work supported by NSF. The information
may be disclosed to government contractors, experts, volunteers and researchers to complete assigned work; and to other government
agencies in order to coordinate and assess programs. The information may be added to the Reviewer file and used to select potential
candidates to serve as peer reviewers or advisory committee members. See Systems of Records, NSF-50, "Principal Investigator/Proposal
File and Associated Records", 63 Federal Register 267 (January 5, 1998), and NSF-51, "Reviewer/Proposal File and Associated Records",
63 Federal Register 268 (January 5, 1998).

 List of Suggested Reviewers or Reviewers Not To Include (optional)
SUGGESTED REVIEWERS:
Not Listed

REVIEWERS NOT TO INCLUDE:
Not Listed

 Not for distribution

COVER SHEET FOR PROPOSAL TO THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
PROGRAM ANNOUNCEMENT/SOLICITATION NO./CLOSING DATE/if not in response to a program announcement/solicitation enter NSF 15-1

NSF 15-605

FOR NSF USE ONLY

NSF PROPOSAL NUMBER

12/08/15

FOR CONSIDERATION BY NSF ORGANIZATION UNIT(S)

1620992

(Indicate the most specific unit known, i.e. program, division, etc.)

IIP - SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
DATE RECEIVED NUMBER OF COPIES DIVISION ASSIGNED FUND CODE DUNS#

12/04/2015

1

07070000 IIP

EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (EIN) OR
TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (TIN)

5371

FILE LOCATION

(Data Universal Numbering System)

078286980

12/04/2015 5:57pm

IS THIS PROPOSAL BEING SUBMITTED TO ANOTHER FEDERAL
AGENCY?
YES
NO
IF YES, LIST ACRONYM(S)

SHOW PREVIOUS AWARD NO. IF THIS IS
A RENEWAL
AN ACCOMPLISHMENT-BASED RENEWAL

452562977
NAME OF ORGANIZATION TO WHICH AWARD SHOULD BE MADE

ADDRESS OF AWARDEE ORGANIZATION, INCLUDING 9 DIGIT ZIP CODE

Entrepreneurial Innovation
921 Beasley Street #210
Lexington, KY. 405090000

Entrepreneurial Innovation
AWARDEE ORGANIZATION CODE (IF KNOWN)

6250026089
NAME OF PRIMARY PLACE OF PERF

ADDRESS OF PRIMARY PLACE OF PERF, INCLUDING 9 DIGIT ZIP CODE

Entrepreneurial Innovation
2350 Woodhill Drive Suite #152
Lexington ,KY ,405091052 ,US.

Entrepreneurial Innovation

IS AWARDEE ORGANIZATION (Check All That Apply)
(See GPG II.C For Definitions)
TITLE OF PROPOSED PROJECT

MINORITY BUSINESS
IF THIS IS A PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL
WOMAN-OWNED BUSINESS THEN CHECK HERE

SBIR Phase I:MyPatentIdeas.com -- From Search to Research with Fast
Patent-document Correlations

REQUESTED AMOUNT

225,000

$

SMALL BUSINESS
FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION

PROPOSED DURATION (1-60 MONTHS)

12

REQUESTED STARTING DATE

SHOW RELATED PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL NO.
IF APPLICABLE

07/01/16

months

THIS PROPOSAL INCLUDES ANY OF THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW
BEGINNING INVESTIGATOR (GPG I.G.2)

HUMAN SUBJECTS (GPG II.D.7) Human Subjects Assurance Number

DISCLOSURE OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES (GPG II.C.1.e)

Exemption Subsection

PROPRIETARY & PRIVILEGED INFORMATION (GPG I.D, II.C.1.d)

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES: COUNTRY/COUNTRIES INVOLVED (GPG II.C.2.j)

or IRB App. Date

HISTORIC PLACES (GPG II.C.2.j)
VERTEBRATE ANIMALS (GPG II.D.6) IACUC App. Date
PHS Animal Welfare Assurance Number
FUNDING MECHANISM Research - other than RAPID
PI/PD DEPARTMENT

Not a collaborative proposal

PI/PD POSTAL ADDRESS

2350 Woodhill Drive Suite #152

PI/PD FAX NUMBER
NAMES (TYPED)

COLLABORATIVE STATUS

or EAGER

Lexington, KY 40509
United States
High Degree

Yr of Degree

Telephone Number

PhD

2011

509-592-7592

Email Address

PI/PD NAME

Monte J Shaffer
CO-PI/PD

CO-PI/PD

CO-PI/PD

CO-PI/PD

Page 1 of 3

monte.shaffer@gmail.com

 Not for distribution

CERTIFICATION PAGE
Certification for Authorized Organizational Representative (or Equivalent) or Individual Applicant
By electronically signing and submitting this proposal, the Authorized Organizational Representative (AOR) or Individual Applicant is: (1) certifying that statements made herein are true and
complete to the best of his/her knowledge; and (2) agreeing to accept the obligation to comply with NSF award terms and conditions if an award is made as a result of this application. Further,
the applicant is hereby providing certifications regarding conflict of interest (when applicable), drug-free workplace, debarment and suspension, lobbying activities (see below),
nondiscrimination, flood hazard insurance (when applicable), responsible conduct of research, organizational support, Federal tax obligations, unpaid Federal tax liability, and criminal
convictions as set forth in the NSF Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide,Part I: the Grant Proposal Guide (GPG). Willful provision of false information in this application and its
supporting documents or in reports required under an ensuing award is a criminal offense (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001).

Certification Regarding Conflict of Interest
The AOR is required to complete certifications stating that the organization has implemented and is enforcing a written policy on conflicts of interest (COI), consistent with the provisions
of AAG Chapter IV.A.; that, to the best of his/her knowledge, all financial disclosures required by the conflict of interest policy were made; and that conflicts of interest, if any, were,
or prior to the organization’s expenditure of any funds under the award, will be, satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated in accordance with the organization’s conflict of interest policy.
Conflicts that cannot be satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated and research that proceeds without the imposition of conditions or restrictions when a conflict of interest exists,
must be disclosed to NSF via use of the Notifications and Requests Module in FastLane.

Drug Free Work Place Certification
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent), is providing the Drug Free Work Place Certification contained in
Exhibit II-3 of the Grant Proposal Guide.

Debarment and Suspension Certification

(If answer "yes", please provide explanation.)

Is the organization or its principals presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded
from covered transactions by any Federal department or agency?

Yes

No

By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) or Individual Applicant is providing the
Debarment and Suspension Certification contained in Exhibit II-4 of the Grant Proposal Guide.

Certification Regarding Lobbying
This certification is required for an award of a Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000 and for an award of a Federal loan or a commitment providing
for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000.

Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans and Cooperative Agreements
The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
(1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any
agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any
Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
(2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the
undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, ‘‘Disclosure of Lobbying Activities,’’ in accordance with its instructions.
(3) The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly.
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for
making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, Title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less
than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.

Certification Regarding Nondiscrimination
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is providing the Certification Regarding
Nondiscrimination contained in Exhibit II-6 of the Grant Proposal Guide.

Certification Regarding Flood Hazard Insurance
Two sections of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 USC §4012a and §4106) bar Federal agencies from giving financial assistance for acquisition or
construction purposes in any area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as having special flood hazards unless the:
(1) community in which that area is located participates in the national flood insurance program; and
(2) building (and any related equipment) is covered by adequate flood insurance.
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) or Individual Applicant located in FEMA-designated special flood hazard areas is
certifying that adequate flood insurance has been or will be obtained in the following situations:
(1) for NSF grants for the construction of a building or facility, regardless of the dollar amount of the grant; and
(2) for other NSF grants when more than $25,000 has been budgeted in the proposal for repair, alteration or improvement (construction) of a building or facility.

Certification Regarding Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR)
(This certification is not applicable to proposals for conferences, symposia, and workshops.)
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative is certifying that, in accordance with the NSF Proposal
& Award Policies & Procedures Guide, Part II, Award & Administration Guide (AAG) Chapter IV.B., the institution has a plan in place to provide appropriate training and oversight in the
responsible and ethical conduct of research to undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who will be supported by NSF to conduct research.
The AOR shall require that the language of this certification be included in any award documents for all subawards at all tiers.

Page 2 of 3

 Not for distribution

CERTIFICATION PAGE - CONTINUED
Certification Regarding Organizational Support
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is certifying that there is organizational support for the proposal as required by
Section 526 of the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010. This support extends to the portion of the proposal developed to satisfy the Broader Impacts Review Criterion as well as
the Intellectual Merit Review Criterion, and any additional review criteria specified in the solicitation. Organizational support will be made available, as described in the proposal, in order to
address the broader impacts and intellectual merit activities to be undertaken.

Certification Regarding Federal Tax Obligations
When the proposal exceeds $5,000,000, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is required to complete the following certification regarding Federal tax obligations.
By electronically signing the Certification pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative is certifying that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, the proposing organization:
(1) has filed all Federal tax returns required during the three years preceding this certification;
(2) has not been convicted of a criminal offense under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
(3) has not, more than 90 days prior to this certification, been notified of any unpaid Federal tax assessment for which the liability remains unsatisfied, unless the assessment is the
subject of an installment agreement or offer in compromise that has been approved by the Internal Revenue Service and is not in default, or the assessment is the subject of a non-frivolous
administrative or judicial proceeding.

Certification Regarding Unpaid Federal Tax Liability
When the proposing organization is a corporation, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is required to complete the following certification regarding Federal Tax
Liability:
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is certifying that the corporation has no unpaid Federal tax liability that has
been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority
responsible for collecting the tax liability.

Certification Regarding Criminal Convictions
When the proposing organization is a corporation, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is required to complete the following certification regarding Criminal
Convictions:
By electronically signing the Certification Pages, the Authorized Organizational Representative (or equivalent) is certifying that the corporation has not been convicted of a felony criminal
violation under any Federal law within the 24 months preceding the date on which the certification is signed.

AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATIONAL REPRESENTATIVE

SIGNATURE

DATE

NAME

Monte J Shaffer
TELEPHONE NUMBER

509-592-7592

Electronic Signature
EMAIL ADDRESS

Dec 4 2015 5:54PM
FAX NUMBER

monte.shaffer@gmail.com

fm1207rrs-07

Page 3 of 3

 Not for distribution
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
Program Solicitation/Instruction Guide Number

NSF 15-605

SBIR PHASE I - PROPOSAL COVER PAGE
TOPIC
EA
PROPOSAL TITLE

SUBTOPIC LETTER (if any)
TOPIC TITLE
EA4
Educational Technologies and Applications
SBIR Phase I:MyPatentIdeas.com -- From Search to Research with Fast
Patent-document Correlations

COMPANY NAME
Entrepreneurial Innovation

EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (EIN) OR
TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (TIN)
452562977

NAME OF ANY AFFILIATED COMPANIES (Parent, Subsidiary, Predecessor)

ADDRESS (Including address of Company Headquarters and zip code plus four digit extension)
Entrepreneurial Innovation
921 Beasley Street #210
Lexington, KY. 405090000
REQUESTED AMOUNT
PROPOSED DURATION
PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE
$225000
12
THE SMALL BUSINESS CERTIFIES THAT:
Y/N
1. It is a small business as defined in the solicitation.
Y
2. It qualifies as a socially and economically disadvantaged business as defined in the solicitation. (FOR STATISTICAL
PURPOSES ONLY.)
N
3. It qualifies as a women-owned business as defined in the solicitation. (FOR STATISTICAL PURPOSES ONLY)
N
4. NSF is the only Federal agency that has received this proposal (or overlapping or equivalent proposal) from the small
business concern. If No, you must disclose overlapping or equivalent proposals and awards as required by this solicitation. Y
5.SBIR: A minimum of two-thirds of the research will be performed by this firm in Phase I.
STTR: It will perform at least 40 percent of the work and the collaborating research institution will
perform at least 30 percent of the work as described in the proposal.
Y
6. The primary employment of the Principal Investigator will be with this firm at the time of the award and during the
conduct of the research.
Y
7. It will permit the government to disclose the title and technical abstact page, plus the name, address and telephone
number of a corporate official if the proposal does not result in an award to parties that may be interested in
contacting the small business for further information or possible investment.
Y
8. It will comply with the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) and the regulations pursuant thereto.
Y
9. It has previously submitted proposals to NSF.
Y
10. It previously submitted this proposal (which was declined) and significant modifications have been made
as described in the solicitation.
N
11. It has received Phase II awards from the Federal Government. If "yes" provide a company commercialization history
in the supplementary documents module.
N
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR / PROJECT DIRECTOR
NAME
Monte J Shaffer
SOCIAL SECURITY NO.
HIGHEST DEGREE / YEAR
E-MAIL ADDRESS
not displayed intentionally
PhD/2011
monte.shaffer@gmail.com
TELEPHONE NO.
FAX NO.
WEB ADDRESS
509-592-7592
COMPANY OFFICER (FOR BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL MATTERS)
NAME
TITLE
TELEPHONE NO.
Monte Shaffer
Owner
509-592-7592
OTHER INFORMATION
PRESIDENTS NAME
Monte Shaffer
YEAR FIRM FOUNDED 2011
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES (including Parent, Subsidiary, Predecessor)
AVERAGE PREVIOUS 12 MO.: 2
CURRENTLY: 2
RESEARCH INSTITUTION NAME
Entrepreneurial Innovation
RESEARCH INVESTIGATOR NAME
RESEARCH INVESTIGATOR TELEPHONE NO.
PROPRIETARY NOTICE: See instructions concerning proprietary information.
Check Here x if proposal contains proprietary information.

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

Problem Statement (Intellectual Merit)
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project attempts to address a fundamental question for innovators: is your idea patentable? One would think the answer to this question is simply
a click away. Yet surprisingly, this is not the case. Google’s text-matching search intentionally limits a query to about 50 terms to reduce response time. Albeit fast, the thousands of results retrieved,
based on a single search-ranking mechanism, overwhelms rather than informs. Such basic search
cannot extract concepts from the inputed text nor can basic search process an entire document as
a query input. Currently, patent search is not optimal. This project proposes to make documentcorrelation concept search a reality by creating MyPatentIdeas.com to meet this unmet market need
enabling inventors, venture capitalists, patent professionals, grant reviewers, and patent managers
to ascertain existing patents related to a fully-developed idea such as a 40-page research paper
or a 200-page dissertation. Using a two-stage approach (smart multi-faceted search followed by
spectral-decomposition analysis of the subset document corpus), MyPatentIdeas.com’s deep dive
synthesizes multiple searches and analyses, reporting patented documents that are most similar to
the inputed idea document, and educating the searcher about relevant terms, concepts, and technology classifications among these nearest-neighbor patents.

Commercial Feasibility (Broader Impacts)
The scientific rigor of MyPatentIdeas.com to measure nearest-neighbor patents based on textual
analyses can provide meaningful and relevant business-intelligence services to the market. Patent
informatics is purposefully shrouded in ambiguity and our goal of this project is to “deliver transparent and objective patent-network dynamics.” Such a service would benefit the public. Fundamental to the assessment of all entreprenurial opportunities of new innovations is to objectively
ascertain the intellectual-property merit of the proposed technology. This real-time, concept search
based on the inputed idea can transform this industry by leveling the playing field–a single-author
inventor can have the same access to patent analysis as a large corporate patenter (such as IBM) or
even the alleged patent trolls. This technology will benefit the small-business innovator, providing
informative data about the competitive landscape for a fraction of the cost of current patent-search
options available.
Overview: Development of MyPatentIdeas.com using smart-search technologies to answer a
fundamental question (is this idea already patented in the United States?) for inventions.
Keywords: patentability, innovation, entrepreneurship, intellectual property, business services,
knowledge discovery, visualizations,
Educational Technologies and Applications (EA): EA4. Entrepreneurial, Informal, and
Maker Education
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 TABLE OF CONTENTS
For font size and page formatting specifications, see GPG section II.B.2.

Total No. of
Pages

Page No.*
(Optional)*

Cover Sheet for Proposal to the National Science Foundation
Project Summary

(not to exceed 1 page)

1

Table of Contents

1

Project Description (Including Results from Prior
NSF Support) (not to exceed 15 pages) (Exceed only if allowed by a
specific program announcement/solicitation or if approved in
advance by the appropriate NSF Assistant Director or designee)

15

References Cited

1

Biographical Sketches

(Not to exceed 2 pages each)

Budget

2
4

(Plus up to 3 pages of budget justification)

Current and Pending Support

1

Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources

1

Special Information/Supplementary Documents
(Data Management Plan, Mentoring Plan
and Other Supplementary Documents)

1

Appendix (List below. )
(Include only if allowed by a specific program announcement/
solicitation or if approved in advance by the appropriate NSF
Assistant Director or designee)

Appendix Items:

*Proposers may select any numbering mechanism for the proposal. The entire proposal however, must be paginated.
Complete both columns only if the proposal is numbered consecutively.

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

1

PI:

Shaffer

Elevator Pitch

Is your idea already patented? In 10 minutes, you could know! Our software-based service allows
you to quickly assess your idea within the context of all U.S. patents. By simply typing in a few
key words and/or uploading a description of your idea, our software will quickly and automatically
perform a thorough patentability search for you. Your idea will be compared to all of those patented
by the U.S. Patent office, including over 10 million patent documents, and the most relevant results
will be filtered and presented to you. Then, using sophisticated network mathematics, we will
compare your idea directly to the subset of the most relevant patent documents and our software
will give you a top-20 of “nearest neighbors”—patents that are most closely related to your idea.
From there you can determine whether your idea has already been patented either in full or in part,
who your most likely competitors and/or business partners will be if you choose to patent your idea
and build a business around itor perhaps you might choose sell your idea to one of the owners of the
related patents identified by our software. Our software will arm you with the critical information
that you need to bring your ideas to life and, more important, to capitalize on them.
Paid search services take weeks (or longer) to perform and the result is merely one professional’s
opinion. Current patent-search approaches are heuristically driven, described by many as an art:
one requires an in-depth knowledge of patent jargon, appropriate technical keywords, and so on.
The key benefit of our search service for customers would be that they could “know now” using
rigorous scientific methods. In 10 minutes, using our do-it-yourself-initially search methodology,
customers could be informed and educated. Minimum costs1 for patent professionals: an hour of
time ($300), a basic patentability search opinion ($2,000), a basic patent filing ($10,000), total
single-patent costs ($40,000). Before proceeding with such costs, for less than $100, an inventor
can immediately be informed about competitive patents and patent applications that already exist
in relation to his/her idea. Therefore, the direct customer would be the inventor that wants to
ascertain if his/her idea is worth pursuing as a patent. Indirect customers could include venture
capitalists (ascertain the IP landscape of an entrepreneur’s proposal), patent professionals (patent
attorneys developing legal opinions) and patent managers (e.g., a university’s technology transfer
team needs to ascertain if a professor’s invention disclosure is worth pursuing as a patent before
the inventor’s research is disclosed at a conference). The key features of the innovation: (1) the
search is performed on an entire idea, not just a few keywords – literally, a 200-page dissertation
could be copied and pasted into the search box, (2) advanced natural-language pre-processing is
performed on the idea to determine key terms and concepts, (3) several independent smart searches
are performed to define a subset of potential “nearest-neighbor” patent documents, (4) this subset
is further analyzed using singular value decomposition to extract relevant concepts and ascertain
document correlations, (5) synthesized reports based on these searches and analyses are created.
Truly, what we are proposing will make patent search better, faster, cheaper.
1

Extrapolated from two sources (Quinn 2015, Auvil and Divine 2011).
Proprietary information is highlighted throughout this project proposal.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

1

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

2

PI:

Shaffer

Commercial Opportunity

There is a broad societal need for synthesized concept search to answer a fundamental question: is
my idea patentable? Or, what patent documents correlate with my idea, my patent, or my product
offering? We define our potential customer as a searcher with limited resources to spend on patent
analytics, but ‘information on a budget’ is critical to them. Is their idea patentable? Should they
worry about the ‘cease and desist’ patent infringement letter they received?
The ‘promotion of the progress of science’ (U.S. Constitution Article 8, Section 1) and the
‘encouragement of learning’ (1790 Copyright Act) are vital pillars of this country’s strategy for
economic development and are embedded within the mission of the National Science Foundation.
Since inception, over 8,625,000 utility / 675,000 design / 24,000 plant patents have been issued
by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). In 2013, more than 270,000 patents
were issued, of which, over 75,000 were assigned to top-50 multinational companies. By the end
of 2016, this innovation network will surpass 10 million patents plus nearly 4 million non-patented
application documents. Objective tools to diagnose the health of this innovation pipeline by measuring dynamics of the network of patents, inventors, firms, lawyers, examiners, technologies, and
countries would be instrumental in nurturing and fostering innovation in sophisticated R&D research labs and in an entrepreneur’s garage. Organizing the wealth of information available about
patent innovations, creating artificial-intelligent algorithms to extract meaning from this evidence,
and sythesizing these analytics into actionable business intelligence has the potential to reduce
asymmetry of information and bring ‘transparency to intellectual property.’
Our market is a global market – anyone that has an interest in securing an idea as a patent
within the U.S. patenting system. Over 250,000 new patents are issued every year, with an average
patent having about three inventors. Five out of six patents are assigned to a company. Over one
third of those are assigned to the top 50 multinational companies (IBM, Samsung, Canon, Sony,
Microsoft). This means that the remaining two-thirds (nearly 150,000 patents every year) are
assigned directly to inventors or smaller businesses. We identify this group as the un(der)served
market. For each patent issued, there were two applications filed, meaning that applicants gave
up on patenting their idea for several reasons; one of which, we posit, is that the patent examiner
identified that this idea already is described in existing patents. Our search service could have
informed the inventor much sooner before sunk costs were incurred.
How many entrepreneurs/inventors have a good idea, and want to know if the idea is patentable?
Not every inventor (or perceived inventor) has a patent or patenting experience. Everyone perceives
they have an idea new to the world, which makes ‘is my idea patentable’ potentially a general
niche market. Every year, there are 17 million students attending U.S. colleges and universities.
Some are in business schools, getting degrees in marketing or entrepreneurship. Others are in
technical schools, getting degrees in engineering, biology, chemistry, and so on. Both groups have
an interest in patents, patentability, and the value of innovations. Within granting agencies, like the
NSF, thousands of proposals are submitted every year, and the ability to valuate the technological
innovation objectively would have obvious benefits to the review process.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

2

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

We offer an ultra-conservative size of our direct market to be about 4 million users and further
decompose it in red-ocean (highly competitive, cost-prohibitive), blue-ocean (unserved market, see
Kim and Mauborgne (2015)) and purple-ocean (partially-served markets). We want to capture a
portion of this niche, un(der)served market (“do-it-yourself-initially” solutions) mainly inventors
and small business owners.
/ŶǀĞŶƚŽƌƐ        Ϯ͕ϭϮϱ͕ϬϬϬ
The inventor is on his/her computer late at night, thinking
 ƚƚŽƌŶĞǇƐ        ϭ͕ϮϱϬ͕ϬϬϬ
about this great idea and how it can change the world; he/she
 ĐĂĚĞŵŝĐƐ hƐŝŶŐ WĂƚĞŶƚ  ĂƚĂ             ϯϬ͕ϬϬϬ
DĂŶĂŐĞŵĞŶƚ  ŽŶƐƵůƚĂŶƚƐ           ϭϬϬ͕ϬϬϬ
Google searches ‘is my idea patentable’ and sees for $99 (My/W ŵĂŶĂŐĞƌƐ             ϮϬ͕ϬϬϬ
PatentIdeas.com) the question can be immediately answered using
/W  ǆĞĐƵƚŝǀĞƐ             ϱϬ͕ϬϬϬ
“smart-search” technologies. A small business owner receives a leKƚŚĞƌ  ǆĞĐƵƚŝǀĞƐ           ϱϬϬ͕ϬϬϬ
gal threat of patent infringement, demanding ‘cease and desist’ and
       ϰ͕Ϭϳϱ͕ϬϬϬ
a payment of $500,000 for infringement. This letter strikes fear in
hŶƐĞƌǀĞĚ DĂƌŬĞƚ ; ůƵĞ KĐĞĂŶ  
the heart of the small business owner. Before going to a patent
hŶĚĞƌƐĞƌǀĞĚ DĂƌŬĞƚ ;WƵƌƉůĞ KĐĞĂŶ  
 ŽŵƉĞƚŝƚŝǀĞ DĂƌŬĞƚ ;ZĞĚ KĐĞĂŶ 
attorney and spending thousands of dollars there as well, he/she
wants to know how his/her technology is infringing. Financial
Figure 1: Market Size
stress is a key psychographic motivator (whether I am afraid I must
pay a ‘patent troll’ or maybe I am in dire need of finding revenue streams for my technology), and
market intelligence is what we offer with MyPatentIdeas.com (I want to know something RIGHT
NOW that helps relieve my stress). The business owner can simply go to MyPatentIdeas.com and
enter a description of his/her technology to see what’s going on.
We anticipate selling our online software-as-a-service (SaaS) offerings directly to “IP knowledge workers” initially targeting those who want “do-it-yourself-initially” solutions (a la LegalZoom). Customers want initial answers immediately, independently, and anonymously.
We have performed direct market research by talking to hundreds of inventors and patent2
attorneys. We have also talked to CEOs of several mid-range companies to ascertain their IP-management needs that can be answered using search-input/patent-document correlations. This touches
on “freedom-to-operate” searches. Even offices of technology transfer at major universities have an
interest in using the proposed technology if implemented. In sum, the relevant market is interested.
Our goal is to launch a simple search service, one search per token (e.g., for $99). As outlined in our
letters of support, we will initially give away these tokens to small group of interested stakeholders, to beta-test the system, and provide feedback for enhancements. From these conversations, we
may consider other product-pricing models: bulk token purchases, per-seat subscription services,
and so on. Due to the proprietary nature of the inputed searches, we will discuss with potential
customers their concerns regarding privacy and confidentiality which may lead to a new manifestation of the technology in the form of an onsite, private server. The search-engine would update
as new patent documents are released weekly, but all reports and search history would be stored
2

We have a database of all registered patent attorneys [approximately 60,000], with their phone numbers and
email addresses. During the summer of 2013, we had 10 sales interns, directed by Ted McGuire, call many of
these patent attorneys. In this process, we flushed out MyPatentIdeas.com as a top priority for a product offering as
research funds to implement the technology become available.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

3

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

internally on a machine physically located within a firm’s facilities. The initial “proof-of-concept”
commercialization approach will go as follows: (1) we build a prototype search-reporting interface; (2) we provide tokens for free searches for interested parties: entrepreneurs, university IP
managers, corporate IP managers, and patent professional associations; (3) we develop an ecommerce “pay-as-you-use” system to purchase search tokens for money; (4) we update and enhance
our product description pages (e.g., http://www.mypatentideas.com/) as we implement the searchreporting technology; (5) we collect feedback on the service, and research optimal product-pricing
strategies based on searcher’s willingness to pay.
There are competitors in this market. There are several free search tools, such as the USPTO
and Google Patents. These tools allow for advanced3 boolean search, and Google has even suggested a “prior-art finder.” These services are limited: (1) they only use one search-ranking methodology so they may miss important results, (2) they cannot account for contextual concept issues
related to term ambiguity (e.g., strike or car vs. authomobile) hereafter described, (3) they do not
synthesize the results into an informative report. Google has developed a very fast search interface
for the internet, and has applied this search tool to patents. Using one search method, Google gives
a searcher thousands of results in less than one second. Is this what the searcher wants? We think
not. We posit that the searcher wants a comprehensive synthesis of all related documents. The
searcher wants to be informed and educated about how his/her idea relates to existing patent documents. The searcher enters a document, and our system performs multiple searches to make certain
all relevant documents are included; then, our service performs conceptual analyses to determine
document correlations; finally, our service synthesizes the search/analysis into a meaningful report.
There is another layer of competitors that offer per-seat licenses of their patent analytic products.
Some of these competitors even offer some sort of concept-search feature within these enterpriselevel solutions. These tools provided by companies like Thomas Innovation, IBM, PatentCafe now
part of Pantros IP, and Innography are intended for large corporations based on expensive pricing
structures (e.g., around $50,000 per year for a single seat). Our $99-per-search price will enable us
to be a disruptive innovation and low-cost leader (Christensen 1997) thereby providing a service
to the small business owners and innovators that is currently not available to them.
If you currently perform a Google search “is my idea patentable” you will find several resources
enabling the searcher to begin the patenting process (patenting kits). You will also find information on “do-it-yourself” patentability search using basic text-matching search services such as the
USPTO or Google. However, if you carefully scrutinize the market need and the resulting products
and services, you can readily see that the fundamental question is not answered–I have an idea and
I want to know if the idea is already patented before I buy a patenting kit. I am not an expert on
patent-language jargon, nor do I want to be. I merely want to enter my idea into a search box,
and be informed and educated about my idea in relationship to existing patents. Now, the market
does not readily offer a document-correlation patent-search service. Five years ago, this was also
the case. Five years from now, we anticipate this will still be the case. The large incumbents are
3

We again emphasize that there is a limitation of terms allowed in a query:
see https://support.google.com/gsa/answer/4411411#requests.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

4

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

not incentivized to target this un(der)served market. Part of our commercialization effort will be
to get organic traffic to find our website. For example, using various search-engine-optimization4
tools, we conclude that conservatively, there are 20,000 daily searches for this phrase. This search
space is highly competitive, but none of the competition answers the question with an online webapplication solution. We believe this implies a strong market potential. First, can we achieve 1000
visitors per day through organic search? This would save us daily about $6000 over having to pay
for placed advertisements using Google AdWords. Second, from those who visit our page, can we
get a 10% conversion rate? We have developed some live-chat functionality into our website, so
the searcher can ask questions to a sales team enabling us to close the deal. If the price per unit is
$99, with 5% + 10% sales commissions paid to an independent online sales staff, after the technology is developed, we foresee $84 of revenue per sold search. In the above goal-based scenario.
1000 visitors leads to 100 daily searchers, generating $8400 in daily revenues which is $3M in
annual revenues. Obviously, if we create repeat business, and offer other product-pricing options,
we believe that the initial impact of this technology could be $10M per year.
We anticipate that we have all of the necessary technical resources to develop this prototype.
We own five servers with a total storage capacity of 150TB which can easily store all 10 million
patents and the millions of patent-application documents. Across these machines we have over
100 cores (CPUs) and either 64MB or 128MB of RAM in each machine. Additionally, we have
one GPU card (which has thousands of computing cores) which can be used for general-purpose
computing of matrix computations. On the software side of things, we have developed alpha
prototypes of all of the elements needed to make this product offering possible. We will utilize this
project resources to scale these alpha components into an integrated system.

3

Innovation

Published patent documents represent “prior art” in the determination of future patent publications.
As such, understanding patent-document correlations is important to stakeholders in innovation
and its commercialization. Many times, these stakeholders have a document of interest (e.g., an
invention disclosure or a patent publication) and they want to understand which patent documents
are most related to this focal document (idea). Such a technology would enable them to address
fundamental strategic questions: ‘is my idea patentable?’ or ‘what is the competitive landscape of
this focal patent?’ These questions have implications for: (1) patentability, (2) infringement, (3)
freedom-to-operate, and other important issues.

4

If you do a current Google search of this phrase “is my idea patentable”, you should see our blog website appearing on page 2, with a few pages ranked therein. We anticipate enhancing these SEO tactics to improve our overall
placement thereby driving additional traffic.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

5

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

To illustrate the utility of our methodology, consider the following sentences:
1. The workers went on strike due to unsafe work conditions.
2. The boxers strike one another incessantly for 12 rounds.
3. The newcomers strike up a conversation with their neighbors.
The word strike has a different meaning depending on context. In the first sentence, we infer that
strike (noun) is the refusal to work as a form of protest. In the second sentence, we infer that strike
(verb) means to hit. In the third sentence, we infer that strike (verb) means to initiate. If we were to
use Google’s text-matching search for the “strike,” the search engine has no way to distinguish the
multiple meanings from the single search term. Additionally, if two words have a similar meaning
(e.g. car and automobile), results may be missed using Google’s search approach. A more robust
approach accounts for basic word-sense amibiguity5 issues.
Latent semantic analysis (LSA) has been developed (Deerwester et al. 1990, Landauer et al.
1998) enabling the extraction of latent (or hidden) semantic structure thereby addressing these
word-sense amibiguity issues that text-matching search cannot. Albeit robust, this approach for
large document collections is not tractable due to the high-complexity computational restrictions.
We overcome this problem by creating a manageable subset of potentially relevant documents
(through multiple-search strategies), and then perform a custom LSA on this subset corpus.
For a document collection of n documents and m terms, the singular value decomposition
(SVD) necessary to perform LSA has a complexity defined to be: O(n2 m+m3 ). The complexity of
the post-filter correlation computations using cosine similarity is O(n2 −n+m). As a result of this
complexity, performing a full or true SVD on a large document collection (corpus) is intractable
(Hofmann 1999, Blei et al. 2003, Laura et al. 2005) meaning in the traditional form, it is unsuitable
to search a large collection of documents. Consider, for example n = 10 million documents with
a total of m = 250, 000 terms; the complexity of the needed SVD is about 25 quintillion. Our
innovation is to use a search methodology based on the idea inputed to drastically reduce n and
m. For example, if we can create a subset of n
˜ = 2, 000 documents with a total of m
˜ = 200, 000
6
terms reduced to 10,000 terms, the new complexity is 24 million times more efficient. Something
that was intractable can now be delivered to the searcher in a few minutes. If our proposed searchsubset LSA (SSLSA) can be performed in one minute, it would take over 63 years to perform a
realtime, full-document-corpus LSA.
5

Polysemy is when a single term has multiple meanings. Synonymy is when multiple terms share a single meaning.
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is one of the fundamental problems in the field of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) (Navigli 2009, Agirre et al. 2014).
6
We further reduce to m
˜   = 10, 000 terms by constructing the term-document matrix A˜ such that only terms
from the query input are included (not the entire corpus). The query phase reduces n
˜ significantly and m
˜ slightly.
The prune phase reduces m
˜   significantly: we prune to only include terms found in the inputed query. Such pruning
defines the concepts of the analysis based on the natural language of the author of inputed idea.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

6

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

The first aspect of our innovative process is the search input, or query. Normally, this is a few
key words, or maybe a few attributes. In our proposed technology, the input is an entire document.
If you are an inventor with a research paper, you can literally copy and paste the entire document
into the search box as the query. If you are a university IP manager ascertaining whether an
academic’s research paper is worth pursuing as a patented technology, you can copy and paste the
entire document into the search box as the query. If you are reviewing a NSF grant for technical
merit, you can copy and paste the entire proposal into the search box as the query. The input (focal
query document) is an entire document, and the fundamental output will be the most closely related
patent documents, which we define as document correlations. We posit that our specific SSLSA
approach is unique and novel to provide valid results within a reasonable response time.
We however, do not suppose that “concept search” for patents is exclusively our
n = 10 million documents, m = 250,000 1Ͳgram terms (INTRACTABLE)
idea. In fact, we are aware of several enBuild latent semantic index (LSI) from 
Apply this LSI map (terms ї concepts) 
Compute all pairwise 
corpus of all documents or 
to the query document (idea) to 
correlations to the query 
probabilistically from a large subset 
construct common concept weightings 
document and sort to return 
terprises making such search available by
of the corpus
from the idea’s terms
most correlated documents
creating approximation-indices of the entire patent corpus, since full-SVD is not
ñ =  2,000 documents, mѺ
 = 10,000 NͲgram terms 
possible. They offer search services to
large enterprises, and even to patent examiners to determine prior art during the
examination process. The traditional approximation technique: (1) an index is
created about once a month on a random
subset of the entire patent-document collection (and takes several days to compute), (2) the index defines for the entire
Figure 2: Traditional “tractable” LSA approaches vs.
collection term-concept maps that are apSSLSA
plied to the inputed idea, (3) the most relevant documents are retrieved.
With that disclosure, we emphasize that no one is offering a low-cost, do-it-yourself initially
service that will empower the small business innovation researcher. This is the essential aim of our
endeavor. We introduce SSLSA as an automated method to determine document correlations from
an input query document. The resulting analysis is anchored to the natural language of the inventor, not the overarching language structure of all patent documents. This process is a two-stage
approach. In the first stage, we search the entire corpus using several independent N-gram queries
and merge these results into a subset. From this subset, we perform SVD on all query-defined
N-grams using various filtering techniques. Defining the concepts using SVD based on the focal
query document is fundamental to this approach. Rather than having the corpus define the concepts, the focal query (inputed idea) defines the concepts. This is an important nuance as we apply
semantic analysis to innovation documents to ascertain a query’s novelty. The overall research plan
has been designed, and the component elements of the technology associated with the innovation
Uncommon

Perform LSA on 
this subset 
corpus in 

Common

realͲtime 

SmartͲSearch
Filtering

Subset defined

Filter terms 
based on 
query 
document

Compute 

Correlations

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

7

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

have been alpha prototyped. The seed funding from this grant would be to: (1) empirically assess
the validity of the methodology based on optimal input parameters, (2) develop the updating search
methodologies, (3) develop beta reports to the searcher, (4) receive feedback from interested parties to enhance the reports and search interface, (5) develop a working ecommerce platform for the
pay-per-search offering, (6) consider other payment options (bulk purchases, subscription based,
and so on).
A preliminary provisional patent application was filed in Janaury 2014 regarding a less refined
description of this project. We are in the process of filing for a traditional application of this technology. In addition, our cleansed patent-data platform, in its organization, represents a component
of a potential competitive advantage. In our Mergent Patent Archive description, we delineate
how we have data more comprehensive in its preparation than both the USPTO and the Google
patent-search services. Ultimately, our ability to create custom reports based on sophisticated
mathematics and sound statistics so that the average inventor can be impressed with both the depth
and simplicity of the report, will determine the success of this venture in relation to competitors.
The major technical challenge will be the optimal formulation of the multiple-search process
to guarantee a valid nomological capture of potentially relevant patents before SVD is performed.
That is, can we perform searches to get a subset of n
˜ = 2000 documents such that the top, say
200, documents after search-subset SVD (SSLSA) would also be found in the full-SVD document
collection? Our simulated experiments detailed in the Technical Discussion will further outline
how this validity challenge will be addressed.

4

Company/Team

This research will be carried out by Entrepreneurial Innovation, LLC. (DBA Patent Rank). This
company was formed as a Nevada-based LLC, recently converted to a Washington-based LLC,
with foreign-entity operating permissions in the state of Kentucky. The company has a NSF code
of 6250026089, a DUNS number of 078286980, a tax-identification number of 452562977, and a
CCR PIN of PatentR99. We believe the overall Phase I objective can be readily achieved within
the twelve-month performance period.
The company was founded by Monte Shaffer, the principal investigator (PI) in 2011. Since inception, Ted McGuire has been the acting CEO of this company. Both the PI and CEO will devote
a significant level of effort to the proposed Phase I activities. Monte’s efforts will focus on managing and directing the technology development and the overall R&D plan. Ted’s efforts will focus
on the development of market opportunites: direct B2C sales, relationships with venturing groups
and programs, feedback from patent professionals and technical-merit managers at universities and
grant-funding institutions. Monte’s expertise in internet marketing will support Ted’s efforts (e.g.,
see the market-facing informational website already developed: http://www.mypatentideas.com).

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

8

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

The vision of the company Patent Rank
is to bring transparency to patent analytics
through the development of services that objectively inform stakeholders using sophisticated mathematics and statistics (see branded
website: http://www.patent-rank.com). The
company has existing operations. The company’s primary technology is Patent Rank, an
objective value of a patented technology over
time. MyPatentIdeas.com (the value of an
Figure 3: Personnel to Develop Service
idea) fits well within the overall vision and
direction of the company. Patent Rank is involved as an industry partner with an academic initiative known as CRIE (Commercialization Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship) - making cleansed patent data more readily available for academic consumption to advance the study
of innovation and entrepreneurship (see http://crie.patent-rank.com). Additionally, using the same
patent repository, Patent Rank has developed a patent-archival module7 within Mergent’s Archives.
Within this aforementioned product, Patent Rank has developed a robust boolean-search methodology that can be leveraged in the development of this concept-search technology.
Since 2008, Monte has been cleansing and augmenting the patent-data platform. The technical
and commercialization team has developed since that
time. Mirek Truszczynski has facilitated the advancement of computer-science algorithms into the
data cleansing procedures and also facilitates efficient
programming objectives performed by the computerscience research students also included on the proposal. Tung Tran is in his second year of a Ph.D.
program in Computer Science and has been working on the patent data since the Fall of 2013. His
major responsibilities have been the core patent data
objects, the search-engine implementations, and the
development of natural-language processing methods.
Orion Fisher is planning on beginning his first year of
a Ph.D. program in Computer Science and has been
working on the patent data since the Summer of 2014.
Orion has been working on the fundamental SVD ma- Figure 4: Module of Mergent Archives
trix computations with efforts of making these computations as efficient as possible utilizing various approaches.
7

http://www.mergent.com/solutions/print-digital-archives/mergent-archives

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

9

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

The company has had some limited revenues over the past three years. The core valuation
technology, Patent Rank, received a NSF SBIR Phase I/Ib Award IIP #1315850 and external funding from Kentucky’s Innovation Network to support the development of the patent-data platform.
When Monte Shaffer completed his dissertation (Shaffer 2011) and founded this company, he had
less than 2 terabytes (TB) of patent data. Now, the company has over 50 TBs of patent data, and the
repository is growing weekly as new patent data is made available through the United States Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO). In addition to the grant-funds as revenues, through the development of the relationship with Mergent, patent archives as a module of Mergent Archives has been
purchased and installed at major universities in the United States, generating marketing-facing
revenues.

5

Technical Discussion / R&D Plan

We define the following:
Stopwords Words filtered out before the processing of natural language text. For example,
the “snowball” list: a, about, above, after, again, against . . .
N-gram A contiguous sequence of N items from a given sequence of text unaffected by
the stopword filtering.
Term Any unique N-gram.
Document Sequence of Nt terms denoted by d = (t1 , t2 , . . . , tNt ) where ti represents the
ordinal ith term in the sequence of all terms.
Corpus Collection of n documents denoted by D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dn } where dj represents
any specific element in D.
Query Unstructured text q that is stopward filtered and defined using the N-gram terms
as the focal input document dq . This document may or may not be part of the
corpus.
Common A term ti from the query that is frequent within the corpus. The most common
term tC1 , the second most common term tC2 , and so on.
Uncommon A term ti from the query that is rare within the corpus. The most uncommon term
tU1 , the second most uncommon term tU2 , and so on.
Index A ranked term-frequency scheme derived from the corpus to determine the (un)common
nature of an individual term. The index returns the rank (or quantile) if the term
exists. If the term is not found, null is returned.
˜ retrieved in (un)common searches where
Subset Collection of n
˜ documents denoted by D
n
˜ n
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

10

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

[We consider this entire section to be proprietary.]

Traditional LSA (latent semantic analysis) is intractable with millions of documents defined
within an information retrieval system. Other approaches that anchor to LSA-methodologies,
most notably the probabilistic approximation techniques (Hofmann 1999), build an approximate
concept-map. We, however, do not want to lose the ability to determine concepts based on the
inputed query document, so we want to perform8 SVD (singular value decomposition) based on
the key phrases from the query NOT from the overall concepts of the entire patent collection. For
example, if 400 concepts were defined from a corpus of 10 million documents across 250,000
terms, the dimensionality of each concept explains less and less variance. The first concept explains the most variance, the second concept explains the next most variance, and so on. The top
concepts in this construction would be more related to the overall requirements of natural language
within patent documents. On the other hand, if we were to reduce the document set using our subset corpus methodology and we also include the terms based on those that exist within the query
document, all concepts will be uniquely defined based on the inputed idea. Although subtle, this
is an important feature of our document-correlation strategy. The searcher is informed based on
the inputed text, and all concepts are anchored to that custom query request. Our method, SSLSA
(subset-search LSA), reduces the dimensionality of the computation significantly. Ideally, we want
to demonstrate that this method works without loss of generality. That is, if we performed full LSA
and identified the top-20 most correlated documents (based on terms and concepts) relative to the
query document, would we get the same top-20 results using our SSLSA methodology. As previously mentioned above, doing so would make the computational complexity 24 million times more
efficient. Mathematically, we define SVD (Deerwester et al. 1990) as:
A = U SV T

(1)

where An×m represents the term-document matrix9 that can be decomposed as the product of three
matrices U , S, and V T where matrix S is a diagonal matrix representing eigenvalues for the termdocument system. Necessarily, each eigenvalue is necessarily smaller than the previous and the
inclusion of all eigenvalues would perfectly represent a linear combination of a weighting schema
of all terms mapped to all documents. Based on these mathematics, one can consider or a fixed
number of eigenvalues within S, hereafter defined as k concepts. This is equivalent to zeroing-out
all additional singular values of S which also correspondingly affect U and V T . That is, we can
observe Uk , Sk , VkT . Furthermore, if we truncate A as A˜ based on our proposed methodologies, we
can similarly observe U˜k , S˜k , V˜kT .
8

SVD is mathematically equivalent to PCA (principal components analysis).
The matrix has terms as columns, documents as rows. The values of aij ∈ A can be either frequency counts (how
many times the term appears within the given document) or some normative weighting based on within-document and
within-corpus frequencies. The rank of S is rk(S) = min(n, m). Based on these deconstructions and conforming
properties of matrix multiplication: Un×rk(S) represents the document-concept matrix and Vm×rk(S) represents the
term-concept matrix.
9

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

11

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

Innovation Details
Can we develop “smart-search” technologies to ascertain a subset corpus of the entire patent collection such that the subset n
˜   n, yet the document correlations are just as valid as if we did
perform semantic analyses on the entire collection? Although most semantic analyses utilize the
“bag-of-words” assumption (Blei et al. 2003), we utilize key N-grams or phrases to more carefully
define the subset through an initial meta-search protocol (the granularity hypothesis).
We identify phrases as common 1: procedure SSLSA(q, D, r, k)
˜ =∅
or uncommon by indexing all phrases 2:
D
in the entire patent collection. For 3:
dq ←NGRAM(q, r)
example, the 1-gram phrase “claim” 4:
while r  = 0 do
  For r-gram terms
is a required word in all patent doc- 5:
sc ←SEARCH(dq , r, NC(r) ,common)
uments, so it is very common. A 6:
su ←SEARCH(dq , r, NU(r) ,uncommon)
2-gram phrase “semantic analysis” 7:
˜ =D
˜ ∪ sc ∪ su
D
is likely a term that is not common 8:
r =r−1
within the patent collection. A 3- 9:
˜ is the subset
end while
 D
gram phrase “natural language pro- 10:
˜ =D
˜ ∪ dq ;
D
cessing” is even more likely a term 11:
˜
A˜ ←FILTER(dq , D)
that is not common within the patent 12:
˜
Compute SVD(A) for k concepts
collection. Furthermore, this 3-gram, 13:
Note U˜k , S˜k , V˜kT
can be decomposed into smaller N- 14:
˜
Compute pairwise similarities (di , dj ) in D
grams: 1-grams {natural, language, 15: end procedure
processing} and 2-grams {natural
language, language processing}. If 16: procedure NGRAM(text,r)
remove stopwords
we define our search to include all 17:
18:
build frequency for each unaffected r-gram
3-grams and the relevant decomporeturn d
  Document as term-frequency vector
sitions, our multiple-search methods 19:
should be very precise as a prefilter 20: end procedure
to create a subset corpus. We posit 21: procedure SEARCH(d , r, n,method)
q
that common searches will capture 22:
(common) from index: OR top-n r-grams
the general technological space of 23:
(uncommon) from index: OR bottom-n r-grams
the idea and that uncommon searches 24:
return s   Most relevant results (results ≤ 250)
will capture the technological speci- 25: end procedure
ficity of the idea.
˜
For each relevant N-gram, we 26: procedure FILTER(dq , D)
˜
Construct Term-Document Matrix of D
can query the patent-term index and 27:
Filter by terms found in dq
return quantile thereby ascertaining 28:
return A˜
its (un)commonality. We can simi- 29:
larly perform N-gram analysis of the 30: end procedure
Figure 5: SSLSA Algorithm
inputed idea as a query document.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

12

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

Now, we can describe commonality and uncommonality at the patent-collection level (the corpus) and at the inputed-idea level (the query-document). Utilizing these features, can we develop
independent search methodologies to nomologically capture all relevant patent documents such
that the most correlated documents (e.g., top-20) are always obtained? This is the optimality constraint that will make this technological innovation very meaningful to the market. Once we have
appropriately captured the subset, we can create a custom LSA based on the inputed idea, and report the most-related documents. The terms of the custom LSA are defined by the inputed idea, and
various weighting mechanisms can be developed based on local/subset/global corpus frequencies.
Above, in Figure 5, we outline the basic algorithm design for our prototype fast-document
correlations innovation with inputs: query q, document corpus D, number of N-grams r, number
of concepts k. First, we filter out very common words, known as stop words. Next, we create
N-grams based on the query input. For each N-gram, we perform an independent (un)common
search based on a predefined policy. We perform independent searches, and merge10 the resulting
˜ At this stage, we can also summarily report on these multiple-search11
set as subset corpus D.
results. We can also build nomological word clouds based on the (un)commonalities of the idea
searched and patent documents. Finally, we proceed to perform SVD to identify concepts of this
subset corpus. In the synthesized report, we can create word clouds describing the most important
concepts educating the searcher on the technological space using terms from patented technology
descriptions. In addition, we can perform pairwise correlations which will enable us to visually
graph the result set (based on say the first two dimensions or concepts). From this graph, we can
create a document map. On this map, we can place a star (your idea is here) and overlay technology
classifications of patent documents. We can then do an inset zoom feature, and describe the most
relevant documented patents.

Research Objectives and Technical Tasks
The overall research objective is to validate the nomological capture of this SSLSA approach. If
successful, the web application can be prototyped.
[Task 1:] Data feeds. Automation of downloading new patent data (weekly, every
Tuesday); parsing and cleansing the data; Automation of downloading new
patent applications (weekly, every Thursday); parsing and cleansing the
data; update search and commonality indices.
[Task 2:] Optimal Nomological Search (Experiment). Run simulated experiments
to ascertain the optimal nomological capture. More details follow.
[Task 3:] Optimal SVD / correlation computations. Optimize matrix computations across multiple machines (develop a master/slave work flow system
10
11

The subset corpus will be defined as a union of all independent searches.
This is, as-if we went to Google and performed multiple searches and combined all top results.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

13

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

so results can be returned in two stages, with a goal that the total response
time for this custom information-retrieval process be less than 10 minutes).
[Task 4:] Synthesized reports (e.g., Mirek’s personality12 report). Develop a summary report of the search results and an advanced report educating the
searcher on the relevant concepts and nearest-neighbor patent documents.
[Task 5:] Ecommerce web application Build a website that is secure (SSL) with
payment options, and the search-reporting interface.

Optimal Nomological Search (Experiment).
The entire U.S. patent corpus contains approximately 10 million patent documents. The fundamental validity question is: “if we use a search methodology to reduce the SVD dimensions, do we still
capture all potentially correlated documents?” We define this validity question as comprehensive
nomological capture. To demonstrate the validity of SSLSA, as part of our simulated-experiment
design, we have created a patent corpus: we first searched for all patents invented by Kia Silverbrook, the most prolific inventor in the world. We obtained over 4500 documents. We next
randomly selected a utility patent granted in the same year as a corresponding Kia patent. Taken
together, we define this sample as our corpus D. We posit that the Kia patents should necessarily
be more closely correlated to each other, since they represent patents from the same inventor which
we posit uses the same natural-language preferences. They represent an adjacent neighborhood of
similar patents. Conversely, the random sample should consist of patents not closely correlated.
Within this sample corpus, we have over 9000 documents, and full SVD can be computed
(that is, it is tractable). We will perform full SVD to define “true similarity” among documents.
This introduces the first parameter selection r, the number of N-grams to include in defining the
term-document matrix A. We will run simulations to test r = 1 (similar to bag of words) up
through r = 5 where 5-grams and corresponding 4-grams, 3-grams, 2-grams, and 1-grams are
defined as terms (the granularity hypothesis of linked phrases). The second parameter selection k
represents the number of concepts to be extracted. Prior research suggests that an optimal range
for k = [50, 1000] (Landauer et al. 1998); in our simulated design, we will loop over values for
k = 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000. At the full-SVD level, we therefore have 25 simulation-combinations
to perform (5 levels of N-grams and 5 levels of concepts).
Several features within a simulation can also be manipulated, in search of optimality. Features
include: the minimum frequency for a term to be included in the matrix, whether the terms are
pruned based on the query or if all terms are included (the inventor’s-language hypothesis), how
the term-document matrix is constructed (various weighting methods), how truth is defined (top10, top-20, top-50, top-100), the number of results returned from a single search (top-50, top-100,
top-250, top-500), the number of (un)common search terms that are included in a single search
12

We have experience building advanced reports: http://www.profiletraits.com/a/report/self/RkouG9janggAAOoEhvs/

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

14

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

(current options selected are the same for both (un)common searches: NC(r) = NU(r) = 10 or
NC(r) = NU(r) = 5r + 5 or NC(r) = NU(r) = 2r + 5), and so on. In total, we have over 5000
simulation-scenarios. For a single simulation-scenario, we will perform 100 simulations (a total
of 500,000 trials). We estimate that running on 90+ cores (CPUs), these simulation-scenarios will
take approximately 20 days to run.
We randomly select a document from the corpus D, and label it the search query. We note if
this document was part of the Kia subset or not. Given the specific parameters of the scenario, we
perform the necessary SSLSA and we compute all pairwise correlations for the query document q
˜ Sorting on these correlations, we identify the nearest patent neighbors. At
and the subset corpus D.
the full-SVD layer, we do simular correlations to identify what we define as true similarity. Did we
lose any top results in our SSLSA approach? To ascertain this, we define potential “nomological
capture errors.” We define Type I error as the percentage of excluded documents found in nearest
˜ We define Type II error as the percentage of included docuneighbors of D but not found in D.
˜ but not found in nearest neighbors of D. As previously mentioned, we define
ments found in D
these errors for various levels of correlation (top-10, top-20, top-50, top-100). We may attempt to
develop a hypothesis test of such misclassifications as an extension of the work of Dasgupta et al.
(2015).

Timeline
We anticipate this research and development (R&D) project to take 12 months from July 1, 2016–
June 30, 2017. The first two months will be used to prepare the initial data feeds, and design the
experiments to ascertain the optimal parameter selection for nomological capture. Thereafter, the
ecommerce web-application will be built in tandem with the custom reporting features. We anticipate that about six months into this project (December 2016), we will have a working prototype
that we can allow interested parties to beta-test. In the first six months, we believe over 80% of the
project will be complete, but common to pareto problems, the refinement to finish the prototype
(remaining 20%) will take an additional six months. We have already developed a commercial application called Patent Rank database and are aware of the difficulties and obstacles in developing
a new commercial application. Also, we succeeded in developing our commercial application with
a budget that was slightly less than the current proposed one. Hence, we are confident that our
team can overcome the various obstacles that invariably occur in this process.

6

Conclusion

We have a plan. We have the patent data. We have the computing resources. We have the knowhow. We have the ambition. We now need the funding to make this happen. With the appropriate
funds, we will be able to accelerate the research and commercialization process to make MyPatentIdeas.com a successful and valid patent-search service.
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

15

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

C. References Cited
References
Agirre, Eneko, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, Aitor Soroa. 2014. Random walks for knowledge-based word sense
disambiguation. Computational Linguistics 40(1) 57–84.
Auvil, Steven M., David A. Divine. 2011. AIPLA Report Of The Economic Survey 2011 . (Accessed:
November 1, 2015).
{http://www.aipla.org/members/Documents/AIPLA%202011%20Report-%20Summary%20102411.pdf}.
Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3 993–1022.
Christensen, Clayton. 1997. The innovator’s dilemma: when new technologies cause great firms to fail.
Harvard Business Review Press.
Dasgupta, Nairanjana, Alan Genz, Nicole Lazar. 2015. A look at multiplicity through misclassification.
Sankhya B: The Indian Journal of Statistics Forthcoming.
Deerwester, Scott C., Susan T Dumais, Thomas K. Landauer, George W. Furnas, Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. JAsIs 41(6) 391–407.
Hofmann, Thomas. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. Proceedings of the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM, 50–57.
Kim, W Chan, Renee Mauborgne. 2015. Blue Ocean Strategy, Expanded Edition: How to Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant. Harvard Business Review Press.
Landauer, Thomas K, Peter W Foltz, Darrell Laham. 1998. An introduction to latent semantic analysis.
Discourse processes 25(2-3) 259–284.
Laura, Luigi, Umberto Nanni, Fabiano Sarracco. 2005. Fast LSI-based techniques for query expansion in
text retrieval systems. International Workshop on Text-Based Information Retrieval. Citeseer, 15.
Navigli, Roberto. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 41(2) 10.
Quinn, Gene. 2015. The Cost of Obtaining a Patent in the U.S. (Accessed: November 1, 2015).
http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2015/04/04/the-cost-of-obtaining-a-patent-in-the-us/.
Shaffer, Monte J. 2011. Entrepreneurial Innovation: Patent Rank and Marketing Science. Dissertation,
Washington State University. http://www.mshaffer.com/dissertation/mjsPRINT.pdf.
Song, Michael, Tang Wang, Mark E. Parry. 2010. Do market information processes improve new venture
performance? Journal of Business Venturing 25(6) 556 – 568.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

16

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

D. Biographical sketches
Monte J. Shaffer
Owner/Founder, Patent Rank

Monte J. Shaffer earned his Ph.D. (May 2011) in Marketing with a dissertation entitled “Entrepreneurial Innovation: Patent Rank and Marketing
Science.” Over the past several years, Monte developed the dataset and
the parsing algorithms to extract data from the patent files he harvested
from the USPTO. Prior to completing graduate degrees (MBA Marketing
Research, M.S. Statistics, Ph.D. in Marketing), he had significant experience developing commercial web applications, including: for the United States Marines (USMC),
Embry-Riddle Aeronautics, the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS), consumer-product websites
(e.g., iloveorganicgirl.com, selftestonline.com, pezzinifarms.com, apr-carmel.com), and several
informational websites.
Interactive CV: http://www.mshaffer.com/arizona/
LinkedIn Profile: https://www.linkedin.com/profile/view?id=3128529

Miroslaw (Mirek) Truszczynski
Professor of Knowledge Representation and Artificial Intelligence,
Computer Science Department, University of Kentucky

Mirek received his PhD in Mathematics from the Warsaw University
of Technology. He joined the Department of Computer Science at the
University of Kentucky in 1984, became full professor in 1991, served as
Consultant
department chair from 1993 to 2007. Mirek’s research interests include
knowledge representation, nonmonotonic reasoning, logic programming, and constraint satisfaction and programming. He is the author or co-author of over 170 technical papers in journals,
conference proceedings and books. Mirek is active in his research community. He was an organizer or the program committee chair for several major conferences in his field. He served on the
Executive Committee of the Association of Logic Programming (2003-2008), and as Chair of the
Steering Committee of Nonmonotonic Reasoning Workshops (2000 - 2008). Since 2000, he has
been a member of the Steering Committee of Knowledge Representation, Inc. In 2010-2012 he
served as President of that organization. Mirek serves on editorial and advisory boards of several
professional journals, including Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, Artificial Intelligence
(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

17

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

Journal, Theory and Practice of Logic Programming and AI Communications. In 2013, Mirek
was elected Fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). In
January 2015, he began serving as Editor-in-Chief of the journal Theory and Practice of Logic
Programming (TPLP).
Short CV:
Website:

http://www.mshaffer.com/arizona/Mirek.pdf
http://tinyurl.com/jojdojf

Ted McGuire
CEO, Patent Rank
Ted McGuire is a graduate of the University of Arizona Eller College of Management where he
earned a Bachelors of Science in Marketing and Entrepreneurship. He has worked for the past 20
years in the private sector. He has developed, launched and sold websites for the travel industry.
In addition, Mr. McGuire has worked in the insurance industry as well as real estate development.
He currently operates a small business in Tucson, Arizona where he lives with his wife and four
children. He is active in his community and believes “People are the most important asset in any
organization.”

Nairanjana (Jan) Dasgupta
Professor of Statistics and Distributional Probability,
Department of Mathematics, Washington State University

Jan received her PhD in Statistics from the University of South Carolina. Working with her advisor, John D. Spurrier, Jan developed a multivariate chi-square hypothesis test for multiple comparisons to control for
logistic regressions. As Monte’s advisor for his M.S. Statistics, together,
they generalized this hypothesis test for paremeterized nonlinear growth
Consultant
models. This statistical procedure is a foundation of the patent-prediction
model developed by Monte (see http://www.google.com/patents/US20120317040 ). She will be
Short CV:
Website:

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

http://www.mshaffer.com/arizona/Jan.pdf
http://www.math.wsu.edu/faculty/ndasgupta/

Page

18

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SUMMARY
PROPOSAL BUDGET

YEAR

1

FOR NSF USE ONLY
PROPOSAL NO.
DURATION (months)
Proposed Granted
AWARD NO.

ORGANIZATION

Entrepreneurial Innovation
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR / PROJECT DIRECTOR

Monte Shaffer
A. SENIOR PERSONNEL: PI/PD, Co-PI’s, Faculty and Other Senior Associates
(List each separately with title, A.7. show number in brackets)

NSF Funded
Person-months

CAL

ACAD

1.
0.00 0.00
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. ( 0 ) OTHERS (LIST INDIVIDUALLY ON BUDGET JUSTIFICATION PAGE)
0.00 0.00
7. ( 1 ) TOTAL SENIOR PERSONNEL (1 - 6)
0.00 0.00
B. OTHER PERSONNEL (SHOW NUMBERS IN BRACKETS)
1. ( 0 ) POST DOCTORAL SCHOLARS
0.00 0.00
2. ( 0 ) OTHER PROFESSIONALS (TECHNICIAN, PROGRAMMER, ETC.)
0.00 0.00
3. ( 0 ) GRADUATE STUDENTS
4. ( 0 ) UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS
5. ( 0 ) SECRETARIAL - CLERICAL (IF CHARGED DIRECTLY)
6. ( 0 ) OTHER
TOTAL SALARIES AND WAGES (A + B)
C. FRINGE BENEFITS (IF CHARGED AS DIRECT COSTS)
TOTAL SALARIES, WAGES AND FRINGE BENEFITS (A + B + C)
D. EQUIPMENT (LIST ITEM AND DOLLAR AMOUNT FOR EACH ITEM EXCEEDING $5,000.)

SUMR

Funds
Requested By
proposer

Funds
granted by NSF
(if different)

0.00

0.00
0.00

0
0

0.00
0.00

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

TOTAL EQUIPMENT
E. TRAVEL
1. DOMESTIC (INCL. U.S. POSSESSIONS)
2. FOREIGN

F. PARTICIPANT SUPPORT COSTS
0
1. STIPENDS
$
0
2. TRAVEL
0
3. SUBSISTENCE
0
4. OTHER
(
)
TOTAL
PARTICIPANT
COSTS
0
G. OTHER DIRECT COSTS
1. MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES
2. PUBLICATION COSTS/DOCUMENTATION/DISSEMINATION
3. CONSULTANT SERVICES
4. COMPUTER SERVICES
5. SUBAWARDS
6. OTHER
TOTAL OTHER DIRECT COSTS
H. TOTAL DIRECT COSTS (A THROUGH G)
I. INDIRECT COSTS (F&A)(SPECIFY RATE AND BASE)

0
0
0
0
0
0
225,000
225,000
225,000

(Rate: , Base: )
0
225,000
0
225,000

TOTAL INDIRECT COSTS (F&A)
J. TOTAL DIRECT AND INDIRECT COSTS (H + I)
K. SMALL BUSINESS FEE (IF REQUESTED MAXIMUM = 7% OF J )
L. TOTAL COST AND FEE (J + K)

fm1030sb-07

PI/PD NAME

Monte Shaffer
ORG. REP. NAME*

FOR NSF USE ONLY
INDIRECT COST RATE VERIFICATION
Date Checked

Date Of Rate Sheet

Initials - ORG

Monte Shaffer
1 *ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES REQUIRED ONLY FOR REVISED BUDGET

 SUMMARY
PROPOSAL BUDGET

Cumulative
FOR NSF USE ONLY
PROPOSAL NO.
DURATION (months)
Proposed Granted
AWARD NO.

ORGANIZATION

Entrepreneurial Innovation
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR / PROJECT DIRECTOR

Monte Shaffer
A. SENIOR PERSONNEL: PI/PD, Co-PI’s, Faculty and Other Senior Associates
(List each separately with title, A.7. show number in brackets)

NSF Funded
Person-months

CAL

ACAD

1.
0.00 0.00
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. (
) OTHERS (LIST INDIVIDUALLY ON BUDGET JUSTIFICATION PAGE)
0.00 0.00
7. ( 0 ) TOTAL SENIOR PERSONNEL (1 - 6)
0.00 0.00
B. OTHER PERSONNEL (SHOW NUMBERS IN BRACKETS)
1. ( 0 ) POST DOCTORAL SCHOLARS
0.00 0.00
2. ( 0 ) OTHER PROFESSIONALS (TECHNICIAN, PROGRAMMER, ETC.)
0.00 0.00
3. ( 0 ) GRADUATE STUDENTS
4. ( 0 ) UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS
5. ( 0 ) SECRETARIAL - CLERICAL (IF CHARGED DIRECTLY)
6. ( 0 ) OTHER
TOTAL SALARIES AND WAGES (A + B)
C. FRINGE BENEFITS (IF CHARGED AS DIRECT COSTS)
TOTAL SALARIES, WAGES AND FRINGE BENEFITS (A + B + C)
D. EQUIPMENT (LIST ITEM AND DOLLAR AMOUNT FOR EACH ITEM EXCEEDING $5,000.)

SUMR

Funds
Requested By
proposer

Funds
granted by NSF
(if different)

0.00

0.00
0.00

0
0

0.00
0.00

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

TOTAL EQUIPMENT
E. TRAVEL
1. DOMESTIC (INCL. U.S. POSSESSIONS)
2. FOREIGN

F. PARTICIPANT SUPPORT COSTS
0
1. STIPENDS
$
0
2. TRAVEL
0
3. SUBSISTENCE
0
4. OTHER
(
)
TOTAL
PARTICIPANT
COSTS
0
G. OTHER DIRECT COSTS
1. MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES
2. PUBLICATION COSTS/DOCUMENTATION/DISSEMINATION
3. CONSULTANT SERVICES
4. COMPUTER SERVICES
5. SUBAWARDS
6. OTHER
TOTAL OTHER DIRECT COSTS
H. TOTAL DIRECT COSTS (A THROUGH G)
I. INDIRECT COSTS (F&A)(SPECIFY RATE AND BASE)

0
0
0
0
0
0
225,000
225,000
225,000

0
225,000
0
225,000

TOTAL INDIRECT COSTS (F&A)
J. TOTAL DIRECT AND INDIRECT COSTS (H + I)
K. SMALL BUSINESS FEE (IF REQUESTED MAXIMUM = 7% OF J )
L. TOTAL COST AND FEE (J + K)

fm1030sb-07

PI/PD NAME

Monte Shaffer
ORG. REP. NAME*

FOR NSF USE ONLY
INDIRECT COST RATE VERIFICATION
Date Checked

Date Of Rate Sheet

Initials - ORG

Monte Shaffer
C*ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES REQUIRED ONLY FOR REVISED BUDGET

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

E. Budget Justification ($225,000 for 12 months)
We define our Indirect Costs at a conservative rate of 25%. We include costs for travel to the NSF
conference ($4000), and anticipate discretionary Residual Funds to be less than the allowed 7%
rate. Two consultants (Mirek and Jan) will account for $30,000, representing 13% of the budget.

Senior Personnel
Ted McGuire, CEO. (Market Development)
Ted McGuire will commit a substantial portion of his time to focus on market-facing, salesdeveloping strategies. In addition to providing feedback on the end-user reports, Ted will facilitate
the development of an independent sales group. Additionally, Ted will work with the interested
beta-testing partners to demonstrate the system, receive feedback, and pass along enhancement
suggestions to the development team. [See BLS: 11-1011; 11-2022; 41-3099]
12 months × $3, 333.33 = $40, 000

Monte J. Shaffer, Ph.D. (Innovation Development)
Dr. Monte Shaffer (PI) will be the project leader. He will direct research and development with senior
mathematicians/computer scientists/statisticians, manage the development with the technical professionals,
and generally manage personnel/deliverables on this project. [See BLS: 15-2021/15-2041; 11-2021/131161; 15-1132/15-1133/15-1134; 15-1111]
2 months × $10, 000 = $20, 000

Miroslaw (Mirek) Truszczynski, Ph.D. (Algorithm Development)
Dr. Mirek Truszczynski will direct the artificial-intelligence research and computer-engineering designs to
optimally develop the proposed technologies. [See BLS: 15-2021/15-1111] Consultant
2 months × $10, 000 = $20, 000

Nairanjana (Jan) Dasgupta, Ph.D. (Statistics)
Dr. Jan Dasgupta will direct the design and implementation of the statistical computing simulations (experiment) to validate “nomological capture.” [See BLS: 25-1022/15-2041] Consultant
1 month × $10, 000 = $10, 000

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

19

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

Technical/Professional Personnel
Tung Tran (Data Management and Search Platform)
Tung Tran will develop the core system to perform smart search. [See BLS: 15-2021/15-2041; 15-1111]
2 months × $5, 500 = $11, 000

Orion Fisher (Matrix / Correlation Computations)
Orion Fisher will develop the core system to perform LSA. [See BLS: 15-2021/15-2041; 15-1111]
2 months × $5, 500 = $11, 000

To Be Determined (TBD)
Computer Science programmer: Programmer will perform necessary work to support the others named on
the research team. [See BLS: 15-2021/15-2041]
6 months × $5, 000 = $30, 000
System Administrator: Sysadmin will perform necessary hardware configurations for the development of
MyPatentIdeas.com, its maintenance, and security. [See BLS: 15-1142]
4 months × $4, 500 = $18, 000
Web-application Developer: Web Developer will create an ecommerce software-as-a-service (SaaS) solution
(MyPatentIdeas.com) using protocols for both internet and mobile devices (DOM/JQUERY/AJAX). [See
BLS: 15-1134/15-1132]
4 months × $4, 500 = $18, 000

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

20

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

F. Current and Pending Support
Beyond this solicitation for SBIR funding, we do not have any current or pending NSF or government
support for this project.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

21

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

G. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources
Entrepreneurial Innovation, LLC (DBA Patent Rank) has the equipment and facilities necessary to perform
the work. The company owns some basic office furniture, computers, etc.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

22

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

 SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

H. Supplementary Documents
S1. Data Management Plan
All data generated in this SBIR Phase I project is considered proprietary.

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

23

(MyPatentIdeas.com)

   
 
December 3, 2015
National Science Foundation
Proposal Review Committee SBIR #15-605
IIP: EA4. Entrepreneurial, Informal, and Maker Education
RE: Letter of Support for Proposed Technology MyPatentIdeas by Dr. Monte Shaffer

Dear National Science Foundation,
I am writing this letter of support for Dr. Monte J. Shaffer and his technological innovation
MyPatentIdeas. As the Executive Director for the McGuire Center of Entrepreneurship at the
University of Arizona, I see the immediate need fulfillment of this technology within our
entrepreneurship program. Each student team that develops a business plan with the intent of
launching must position their venture within a competitive landscape. One area of competitive
analysis that is often very difficult to do is the analysis of the intellectual property associated
with the idea for their venture. While our student teams receive consulting advice from
advanced students in the James E. Rogers College of Law at the University of Arizona, this
technology would be a tremendous asset in informing these students about the entrepreneurial
potential of their idea.
The McGuire Center for Entrepreneurship is an independent Center within the Eller College of
Management at the University of Arizona. The McGuire Center is the foundation of the
University’s premier and pioneering reputation in entrepreneurship education, and is a key driver
of entrepreneurship research and entrepreneurial activity within the College and broader
community. For nearly 30 years, the McGuire Center’s undergraduate and graduate degree
programs in entrepreneurship have been top-ranked by US News, Economist, Business Week, and
Entrepreneur rankings. For 2016, US News ranked the McGuire Center #3 among public
universities for undergraduate entrepreneurship programs and #7 overall, and #5 among public
universities for graduate programs and #11 overall. Princeton Review/Entrepreneurship
Magazine ranked the McGuire Center #22 among undergraduate programs in entrepreneurship
and #19 among graduate programs.
We have already partnered with Monte’s company to provide research faculty with quality patent
data to advance research on innovation and entrepreneurship. This initiative, CRIE
(Commercialization Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship), see http://crie.patentrank.com/ is under further development. In short, Dr. Shaffer knows patent data well.
We have also agreed to beta test the proposed MyPatentIdeas technology with our student teams
to provide feedback on how entrepreneurs can be better informed about the patented-technology
competitive landscape.

  

                        

 

  
 
If I can be of further help, please feel to contact me at (520) 626-0464.
Sincerely,

Joseph P. Broschak
Executive Director, McGuire Center for Entrepreneurship
Associate Professor of Management & Organizations
University of Arizona, Eller College of Management

  

                        

 

  SBIR Phase I Proposal: From search to research with fast document correlations

PI:

Shaffer

H. Supplementary Documents
S4. Small Business Administration (SBA) Company Registry Documentation
 

  

6%,5 JRY 6%& 5HJLVWUDWLRQ &RQWURO ,' )RUP

  &RPSDQ\ ,QIRUPDWLRQ
 

6%& &RQWURO ,'

6%&B         

&RPSDQ\ 1DPH

(QWUHSUHQHXULDO ,QQRYDWLRQ

$GGUHVV

    %HDVOH\ 6WUHHW   6XLWH        '%$ 3DWHQW 5DQN 

&LW\

/H[LQJWRQ

6WDWH

.<

7,1 (,1

         

'816

         

&RPSDQ\ 85/

KWWS   SDWHQW UDQN FRP 

1XPEHU RI (PSOR\HHV

 

,V WKLV 6%& PDMRULW\ RZQHG E\ PXOWLSOH YHQWXUH FDSLWDO RSHUDWLQJ

1R

=LS

          

FRPSDQLHV  KHGJH IXQGV  RU SULYDWH HTXLW\ ILUPV"
:KDW SHUFHQWDJH     RI WKH 6%& LV PDMRULW\ RZQHG E\ PXOWLSOH YHQWXUH

  

FDSLWDO RSHUDWLQJ FRPSDQLHV  KHGJH IXQGV  RU SULYDWH HTXLW\ ILUPV"
 

(NSF 15-605 IIP:EA4. Entrepreneurial)

Page

25

(MyPatentIdeas.com)